Introduction to Terraform and Infrastructure as Code (IaC)

When we work with cloud platforms like AWS, Azure, or Google Cloud, we often create servers, networks, databases, and many other resources. Doing all of this manually from the cloud console works for learning, but in the real world, it’s not practical. This is where Infrastructure as Code (IaC) comes in.

What Is IaC?

IaC (Infrastructure as Code) means managing and provisioning your cloud infrastructure using code instead of clicking buttons in the console. In simple words: you write a file, run a command, and your infrastructure gets created automatically.

Why Do We Need IaC?

Using the cloud console is fine for small tasks, but real companies have:

Multiple environments like dev, test, QA, staging, prod

Many applications—sometimes hundreds

A lot of repeated setup work

Imagine it takes 2 hours to manually create one environment. If you need 6 environments, that becomes 12 hours per day. And this is only for one application. What if the company has 100 apps?

This is slow, costly, and not efficient.

IaC makes this job extremely fast. With IaC, you can:

Create an entire environment in minutes

Destroy it when not needed

Keep your setup consistent every time

Benefits of IaC

Saves time

Saves cost

Reduces human errors

More secure

No more "it works on my machine" issues

Easy to repeat the same setup again and again

Popular IaC Tools

Terraform – supports almost all cloud providers

Pulumi

Azure ARM Templates – Azure only

AWS CloudFormation – AWS only

GCP Deployment Manager – GCP only

Why Terraform Is the Most Popular

Works with almost every cloud provider

No vendor lock-in

Easy to learn

Uses .tf files written in HCL (HashiCorp Configuration Language)

HCL looks similar to JSON and is simple to read

Not like Python or other programming languages—very beginner-friendly

Basic Terraform Commands

terraform init – initializes Terraform and downloads needed providers

terraform validate – checks your code for errors

terraform plan – shows what Terraform will create

terraform apply – actually creates the resources

terraform destroy – removes all the resources created by Terraform

Terraform talks to the cloud provider’s API (like AWS API) to create or remove resources.

How to Install Terraform

Install Terraform using this link: https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/install

Verify installation with:

terraform -v
Conclusion

This is all you need to get started. Terraform is simple, powerful, and widely used in the industry. In the next session, we will go deeper into how Terraform works.

See you on Day 2!
